---
title: Notification
description:
  Notifications are messages that communicate information to the user. The two
  main types of notifications are toast notifications and inline notifications.
tabs: ['Usage', 'Style', 'Code', 'Accessibility']
---

import A11yStatus from 'components/A11yStatus';

import {
  StructuredListWrapper,
  StructuredListHead,
  StructuredListBody,
  StructuredListRow,
  StructuredListInput,
  StructuredListCell,
  OrderedList,
  ListItem,
} from '@carbon/react';

<PageDescription>

No accessibility annotations are needed for notifications, but keep these
considerations in mind if you are modifying Carbon or creating a custom
component.

</PageDescription>

<AnchorLinks>
  <AnchorLink>What Carbon provides</AnchorLink>
  <AnchorLink>Design recommendations</AnchorLink>
  <AnchorLink>Development considerations</AnchorLink>
</AnchorLinks>

## What Carbon provides

Carbon bakes keyboard operation into its components, improving the experience of
blind users and others who operate via the keyboard. Carbon incorporates many
other accessibility considerations, some of which are described below.

### Keyboard interactions

Users can navigate through the interactive elements within the notification
using the `Tab` key. Actions such as closing or activating buttons can be
performed using the `Space` or `Enter` keys. Additionally, the notification can
optionally be closed by pressing the `Escape` key.

#### Inline and toast

Inline and toast notifications do not contain interactive elements. They use the
roles of `status`, `alert`, or `log`, and they do not receive focus.

#### Actionable

Actionable notifications may contain interactive elements such as links and
buttons. This component grabs and traps focus until an action is taken or the
notification is dismissed. Users can navigate through the interactive elements
using the `Tab` key, and actions like closing or activating buttons can be
performed using the `Space` or `Enter` keys. Additionally, the notification can
be optionally closed by pressing the `Escape` key.

<Row>
<Column colLg={8}>

![Focus trapped until an action is taken or the notification is dismissed.](images/notification-accessibility-actionable.png)

<Caption>
  Focus trapped until an action is taken or the notification is dismissed.
</Caption>

</Column>
</Row>

#### Callout

A Callout is not automatically announced by screen readers. It can include
interactive elements such as links, which users can navigate through using the
`Tab` key. Additionally, actions to activate these links can be performed using
the `Space` or `Enter` keys.

<Row>
<Column colLg={8}>

![Navigating through interactive elements using the Tab key.](images/notification-accessibility-callout.png)

<Caption>Navigating through interactive elements using the Tab key.</Caption>

</Column>
</Row>

## Design recommendations

### Semantic styling

When using semantic styling on notifications, it's crucial to ensure
accessibility by providing clear, concise text. Colours used to indicate status
should always be paired with icons to avoid reliance on colour alone.

#### Text

It is recommended that notification messages use plain text, as semantic styling
such as bold or italic and structural elements like `<li>` are not conveyed to
users by screen readers. If semantic styling must be included, it should not be
essential for understanding the notification

#### Icon and colours

Ensure that screen readers can access the icon within the Callout to convey the
type or semantic meaning of the message. The icon should have descriptive alt
text that provides context about the Callout's type (e.g., information or
warning). This helps users understand the nature and importance of the message.

## Development considerations

Use a role of `alert`, `log`, or `status` for notifications that do not require
user action. For notifications that require user action, use a role of
`alertdialog`.

Special care should be given to focus management for notifications with
interactive elements or actions. Venturing beyond using a role of `alert` `log`
`status` or `alertdialog` for event-driven notifications is not recommended at
this time as presents unique challenges. If you choose to do so, there are two
known possible approaches to consider and research on your own.

- Collect notifications in a persistent area in your application for users to be
  able to navigate to and take action on notifications.
- Render notifications in an already-existing `region` that can be accessed via
  a hotkey. Focus should jump to the notification region after the hotkey is
  invoked. Once the user has reached the end of the region, focus should return
  to the previously focused item in the document before the hotkey was invoked.

Neither approach is perfect, but with either one: ensure notifications are
properly announced, respect user timeout preferences, and ultimately provide an
easy way to be navigated to by keyboard/screenreader to take action.

<A11yStatus layout="table" components="Notification" />
